Each of us works so
much alone as we travel around the state and work
intensively with one student as chair that
sometimes the five of us don't interact a whole lot
together enough to keep our feet out of our mouths,
hopefully. Although we've had a time or two of
that, too. And you have the smallest group in the
whole college, right? We've asked for a sixth job
line for the next budget year. Sure,
with that amount of graduates here,
that's hard. Was there anything else in the way of
an insider? observation, an anecdote, anything
that stands out that happened that might be of
interest that would not be in any of the documents.
It's just strictly a personal thing comes to mind.
OK. On the culture of the college, and this is not a
question that I've been asking. It just came about
through this paper. The beliefs, the feelings,
the values, the perceptions of people. What did
you feel about the culture? And I guess you can't
have one for the whole college because every
single floor or every single department is so
different. You would have a department culture,
or in our case, you'd have an adult ed culture and an
ed tech culture. And once in a while, the loops will
overlap. But there is a big balloon that is the
College of Education in terms of belief systems.
When Karian came and he was first pushing the idea
of inquiry groups and wanted to, he said he wanted
to do away with departmental lines and have
different kinds of alliances, which makes a lot of
sense. And everybody sort of, because he was so
different from Hubert, everybody sort of stood
and looked at him for about a year and said, uh-huh.
And then sort of tried to make the inquiry thing
work. And it ran out of steam.
What do you think? Was it just a lack of time, lack of
enthusiasm? What combination? Or leadership?
Because I know a lot of people have talked about it,
and there's a lot of written material on the
inquiry groups. but none on why it's fizzling or
has
fizzled. That's a difficult thing to look at. For
one thing, the annual inquiry days have been
continued whether there was a need for them or not.
And so orders have gone forth saying, thou shalt
attend if you are intact. The first year, or the
first couple of years, everybody went with the
kind of excitement, or at least most people went
with a sort of excitement. And I don't know. I
think, in all honesty, sometimes it seems that the
dean is perhaps preoccupied or very busy with
other things and not really paying attention to
what's happening at home. At home? at in the
college. In the college, OK. And I realize that he
is pulled in a lot of ways with national and
international responsibilities. And so that.
But sometimes it seems like nobody's riding their
horse. OK, that was that into the decision making
part.
Is there a feeling then that vagueness as to who is
making the decisions or riding the horse, as you
put it very well? If it wasn't for Brian Cole, I'm
not sure that many, well, I will go ahead and say
that I'm not sure that many things would be done.
I think he's riding the horse. A lot. Now, I do not
know, I'm not privy to the degree to which he'd
carve and see eye to eye on a lot of things, because I
don't go to the policy committee except when Don's
out of town and things of that nature. But I think,
from my perception, there seems to be somewhat of a
vacuum in the leadership at the top. And I have to
also say, because I've been on the tenure advisory
committee for the college and I'm chair this year,
that I have watched Currigan agonize over the
decisions. We're not an extra layer of approval.
We are there to advise and assist the dean in making
his recommendations. Are you talking about the
tenure? Tenure and promotion. Your chairman,
what is the committee name again? Tenure and
Promotion Advisory Committee, TAPC. Several
years ago, I guess it was about four or five years
ago, the Faculty Advisory Committee of the
college, by lots of discussions and so forth,
decided that there ought to be this group And the
idea was taken to the policy committee, and they
approved it. And the first year, Jerry Capus and
Ernie Getz and I were elected. You have to be
tenured and so forth. And we drew straws. And I lost
and got the three-year straw. But we rotate so that
whoever's on for the third year, the third year of
their term, they're automatically chaired. So
that I'm chair this year, Hurley's chair next
year, McNamara's chair the year after that, and we
elect one each year. And no two from any one
department. That's just for the tenure and
promotion? Tenure and promotion. And what we do is
read all the stuff that the departments send
forward to the dean, and then try to think of any
relevant, pertinent, or impertinent question
which we ought to raise with the dean regarding the
information, but we do not have any vote or any say.
Nor should we. It's not our role. So the ultimate
say is the dean's? The ultimate say is the dean's.
And I've watched him agonize over these things,
and I have become, though I'm not often impressed
by department heads just categorically, I am
impressed with the care and concern they give to
the letters they write recommending or not
recommending somebody's position. Most of them
have a department committee, and that
recommendation comes forward, and then the
department head's recommendation comes
forward. And the dean looks at it. as he said over
and over, and I've now watched him two years, and I
really think he means this, that he looks at these
things from the perspective of, if this person was
not a faculty member of the college, how would we
miss what that person contributes? From that
perspective, he makes his recommendation, and
sometimes it agrees with the departments, and
sometimes it doesn't. If that person was not here,
in what ways would we miss him or her? From the
college level. Right. He expects the department
to look at it from the discipline level, both
locally and nationally. And they know that. And
does that criteria work pretty well? It seems to.
It seems to. Then it goes forward to the provost's
office, and they look at it from still a different
perspective. Which, do you know what that is? I
would say funding, research, teaching, service.
But then that's my bias again. I think although the
words they use aren't that. Everybody was nervous
as a cat when McDonald became provost.
An engineer? A non-pupil person. We don't know yet
what he's like. And the communication, what has
that changed, the communication between? The
communication comes in an annual memo from Kent
Phillips, known as the Phillips Memo, which sets
forth the procedures that will be followed for the
recommendations for tenure and promotion that
year. And they vary a little each year. Now, does
every department have very, very specific
delineated criteria, because I have only seen
one. And I haven't been asking, but one particular
department shared it with me. And it was, I mean,
pages and pages of everything that has to be done.
There is a notebook that you can see. It's in every
office. This is what we did the first year of the
TAPC. We visited with each faculty. We found out
what the procedures were. If there were not
procedures, we yelled and screamed until
procedures were written. We compiled a book of
them for the college. gave each office, each
department office, a copy of the book and a brief
summary of the thing to each faculty member. We
called meetings of the assistant professors for
them to talk about what they're worried about. Had
the dean there. We called a meeting with the
associate professors, but it got canceled. So I
don't know when we're going to do that again. But
we've been working to try to be sure that people
understand the basis on which they will be judged.
That's general for the college. Does every
department in itself have a separate one? That's
what's in that notebook. Oh, and are they pretty
uniform among departments? Are they very
different? Because they need to be. The
departments are different. The disciplines are
different. So that is something that you got input
from each department? A faculty of five is
different from a faculty of 51. Yes, every
department has it. No. Okay, so there is a book that
I can get all of them together. Yeah, if anybody
gives you any hassle, come up. I've got a copy of the
whole thing. But there should be one in every
office, every apartment. Very good. And, of
course, we already talked a little bit about,
well, you said a little bit about what you wished or
would like to see the future hold. What
realistically do you think might be happening in
the College of Education? I think inertia. I only
learned one thing in high school physics, and
that's inertia. A moving body tends to continue in
the direction in which it's moving.
Oh, is that upward, hopefully? No. No? The whole
college isn't? I don't know. I see it more level
enough. I don't think it's down. I think it's
level. Just grind on the way it's going. Because
the damn daily takes time and energy away from
somebody jamming fist into the machinery and
saying, look, let's look at this. Although, I'm
sure people are looking at what the legislation
means to the college. Well, it will impact the
undergraduate a lot more than it would anyway. So
yours is probably not going to be as good. Do you see
the IDD department or what did you call it? It's an
administrative unit. Unit becoming a department
any time? No. The politics of higher ed in Texas is
such that I don't believe it will ever be put
forward as a department. It really gives them a
direct deal of flexibility if it isn't.
The trouble is, Some of the dean's staff, when I
have gone to policy committee, they will talk
about the five departments, and they'll have five
copies of stuff. And number six is sitting there
saying, can we see a copy of that?
One of them especially does that rather
consistently, and it's not Brian Cohen. That's
interesting. We think so, too. So there's a
message there of one kind or another. Now, where
does this adult ed and all the things that are in
IDED in College of Education at A&M, where do they
fit in in other colleges? What are they a part of, or
how are they? Some of them are in departments of
administration. That's for administration of
education. That's where it was at BU where I took
mine. Some are in adult and continuing education.
It varies. There are about 50 adult ed programs in
North America.
Where does the A&M program fit in? In that 50, do you
have any? Pretty high. In spite of the fact that we
don't have any national scholarships and
therefore have trouble recruiting nationally,
we do most of our recruiting in the state of Texas.
But we've had a number of students, well, one guy
from Canada, some from other countries, who come
and say, well, you know, I want in this program
because I think it's the best. Of course, we think
it's the best. Have you... Do you have to do a lot
of... aggressive recruiting, or are the students
not coming to you in great numbers? Our students
are our best recruiters. We're going to shoot some
of them if they keep dragging in students. We've
had to put a limit here in San Antonio. Is that a
problem? It's the size of class. That's a good
problem, I guess. It's not true in Corpus or El
Paso, but we have a viable group in each place. How
did the loss of two of your five faculty members at
one time affect the continuity or the flow of the
department? Were you able to, were the new people
able to? We had to cancel only one class. But we
covered all the rest.
The hardest part has been inheriting chairs of
committee. Because Ken and Adrienne are coming on
fast, but it takes a while to catch on to all the
bureaucratic Mickey Mouse that goes with this
job.
So this December, five people who my chair will
graduate. Two were mine, two were Gary's, one was
Bob's. You can't say no. It
gets a little hairy. Before I turn off the tape, we
continue. Is there anything that you'd like to
summarize or end with? In spite of the fact that my
first year on this faculty was the hardest year of
my employed career for lots of complicated
reasons, I really liked working here. It turned
out to be the best job I ever had. And if I could have
found a way to quit that first year, I would have.
But I couldn't because of family commitments
here. But I'm glad I couldn't. Never mind. Very
good. I thank you for sharing all these insights
with me. And if I have some additional questions, I
hope that you let me come back. Oh, sure.